Start

One of the most amazing things about software development is that there are levels of increasing challenge, yet you can produce value at all levels.  A fully functional application can be made by creating a single file of code with no design patterns.  All software engineers start out trying to figure out HOW to get something to work.  This is a great time to find what different areas and approaches fit in your brain.  One of the best exercises is to try and build the exact same application, but in totally different ways.  Searching "todo app" on google will result in tons of different demos that essentially build a very basic task list that someone can add items and check off completed items.  

The fundamentals of software development are often overlooked.  In order to be great, you must focus on any obstacle than could potentially knock you out of a state of flow.  Regardless of your experience level, the best place to start is with a pencil and a notebook.  A physical notebook helps amplify actions that force you to hesitate.  It could be having to search the internet for information on design decisions to something so small that you may typically not even notice like deciding between private and static variables.  

Start small and force  yourself to write down anything you consciencly think about while writing code.  Don't be discouraged as it takes a lot of mental energy to slow yourself down and document.  If you pause for the same item multiple times, write it down multiple times.  At the end of this exercise, you should have at least 10-20 items for your list. 

Now is where the fun starts.  Take your items and see if you can put them into functional groups: IDE commands, Design Patterns, Coding Best Practices, etc.  The way you interact with your keyboard, mouse and IDE are the most basic fundamentals and the most critical foundation.  




8

Fill & Edit
Episode 1: Software Development World7Writing code can be hard.Often times its a lot of googling or searching stack over flow, copy and pasting code that works inother places. Does it have to be this hard? Is there something wrong with the way we approachsoftware today.We will look at how to move from learning how to code to training to code. This season will focuson how to train your mind to get into a state of flow and produce code more efficiently. In order todo that, we have to change the way we think about coding.I’m Joel Karr, and welcome to episode 1 of the ”Don’t think when you code” podcast brought toyou by Goat Wranglers everywhere. Goat Wranglers are a group of folks in the software industrythat believe that coding can be taken to a new level. You can join them in their pursuits atgoatwranglers.io.In this episode we will focus on the current state of software development and what our goals areto improve what we do each day.For many development teams, there is an expectation to spend 40 hours a week producing code. Thisleaves little or no time for targeted learning or training. When someone is asked how long a taskwill take, they automatically pad it assuming they may get stuck and need to search for answers.After each developer has written out a vague idea of what his tasks are and an estimate, those areoften added up and a firm deadline is set. The team starts from a place with a high level of uncertaintyand then almost immediately new information is added in the form of design challenges or scopechanges to features. The only thing that stays firm is the deadline!When faced with the realization that a deadline will be nearly impossible to meet, a variety of pooroptions are thrown into the mix. Can the team add more developers.....attempting to not only getthem up to speed but also still produce individually at a high level? Can they work extra hours?How long can they go without sleep? What if they chug lots of mt dew?The shift in the industry to more of an agile approach has certainly improved many of thesechallenges. But in a way, it has caused new issues. A team that no longer commits to more than2 weeks of work, won’t feel the pressure of trying to do too much in the finally couple weeks eachquarter, but do they feel the pressure more frequently of the shorter deadlines? A focus on acceptingthat all estimates are really guesses has moved the issue from commitments to uncertainty for co-workers outside of the development team. How can other departments such as sales or support teamsplan the way they communicate with clients when they only know what is coming in the next coupleweeks?So we all agree that the current environment leaves something to be desired.Here is what I believe.I believe that we can do better.I believe that thousands of applications use very similar approaches to coding. Doesn’t matter if its asocial media platform, a banking website, or a game app. And if it has been done many times before,it can be predictable.
Episode 1: Software Development World8I believe that writing code is neither an art nor a science. Its an action. And actions can be optimizedthrough training. The greatest restriction to how fast you can write code should be the speed atwhich you can type.I believe that the industry has focused on avoiding code duplication, but often duplicates the sameconversations in deciding how to architect code? If there is no new information, then why do weconstantly look at all options before determining a design.I believe that through training, we can use our knowledge to optimize the way we think and workin a state of flow resulting in high quality software and improved level of happiness.Throughout this season we will introduce the concept of a Coding Playbook in order to buildeducation and training plans for individuals. We will talk about what is needed to get into a state offlow. And we will focus on how to build a shared mental model so that a team can work together.However, as with many complex concepts, we can not just blow a hole in a damn and instantlychange your perspective. It likely will be a much longer process more like laying branches in a riverto slowly change the flow of the water. Each episode has been designed to build together to formthe overall picture.[Music Ends] ——left of recordingTo start, let’s look at the way we think about code. The actual code that we write is a formof communication. It’s called programming languages for a reason. But unlike most languages,programming languages serve two drastically different audiences. The first is computers, but thecode your write also needs to communicate to other software engineers, including yourself in thefuture.So when we take an approach to learning code that looks at existing examples, we tend to think inchunks of code instead of first determining what we want to communicate.Imagine if you wanted to talk to your friends, but could only use rap lyrics from songs. It reminds meof the movie Transformers where the car Bumblebee was talking through switching radio stationsto parts of songs playing. Think about that for a second...before you could tell anyone something,you first have to find some lyrics in a song that matches what you are trying to say.I don’t want no bugs, a bug is a thing that fails acceptance criteria, breaking functionality. Eeh...let’sjust pretend that didn’t just happen and move on.So instead of starting with code snippets, start with what you want to communicate in the languageyou understand the best. For example, if you can state what you are trying to achieve in plainEnglish, you will start to frame your mind to communicate through a programming language. Thisis often referred to as pseudo code and it allows you to not worry about syntax but focus on whatyou are trying to achieve.In many college courses, core computer science concepts are taught. They often include things likebinary searches and how memory stack vs heap. Unfortunately, as soon as you graduate and getyour first job, these topics are rarely connected to the daily code you are being asked to write.
Episode 1: Software Development World9So how do we combine the production code that we work with daily and a true understanding inan effective way?Elite TeamsSoftware teams can function like elite military or sports teams. Speaking in partial sentences andcode words while fully understanding every aspect of the conversation. Making adjustments in realtime and the entire team adjusting as needed. A team’s actions can be predictable when they havetrained those actions.Most challenges for software development have been solved thousands of times before. This is whatmakes sites like stack overflow so effective. Chances are very high that someone has ran into thesame challenge before.The goal is that typing the the thing that is your bottleneck.Greatness[Music start]Throughout history, there has been a force driving people to accomplish things that weren’t possible.They were willing to endure great sacrifices and remain laser focused on a goal even though successwas extremely unlikely. This force has given individuals and teams the ability to accomplish amazingthings. This force is the pursuit of greatness. We will take a look at how to do great things in softwaredevelopment.[Music ends]The evolution of software development has been driven by countless moments of greatness. Often atthe time of an achievement, very few realized the true level of greatness. This may be best capturedby the achievements of Ada Lovelace, who is widely recognized as creating the first computerprogram. Although many were impressed at the time, very few realized that she was setting thestage for computer programming to become what it is today. Against the popular opinion at the time,Ada believed that computer programming would be used for much more than crunching numbers.Although Ada passed away at age 36 in 1852, the greatness of her achievements is still recognizedtoday.So in the pursuit of greatness.....where do we start?If we look at historic acts of greatness such as breaking the 4 mile barrier for running a mile.InclusionHappiness
Episode 2: Learn to Speak Code[Intro]“How do you know what to type when you are writing code?” - Team Members Answering[Music start]Writing code can be hard. Like.....really hard. I once heard that all software engineers must beoptimist, because if they weren’t, they would have quit already. There is certainly some truth inthat. So, how do some folks make it seem effortless? Do they just have more knowledge? We willexplore the science behind the success.[Music ends]Early in my software career I was in a race to learn everything I needed to know. CSS, HTML, Web,Networking, database design. Knowledge is power, and I wanted to be a superhero. I read the wholeinternet. Ooor at least every blog post on asp.net. I linked keywords to blog posts in my head like amini mental search engine. But... I couldn’t produce code much faster than before.So what did I miss?KnowledgeHow do you learn what is required in the most efficient way?Decision MakingApproaching knowledge as a library allowed me to answer questions, but it didn’t change the WAYI thought.As Malcolm Gladwell described in his book Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking - “Thekey to good decision making is not knowledge. It is understanding. We are swimming in the former.We are desperately lacking in the latter.”For many, the process of deciding what code to write starts with looking at all of the options. Weighthe pro’s and con’s. Our brain is scanning our internal metal tables looking for anything that matchesour virtual where clause! Essentially, we are going through a process of elimination to arrive at asingle path forward. By learning more information, I was giving myself more options to need toeliminate each time.So was all my blog reading a total waste of time? It may not have been the most efficient way togain the knowledge I needed, but it did provide the basis for future decision making. People tend to
Episode 2: Learn to Speak Code11make choices based on the information that have most easily accessible. As you can imagine, this isa core reason that people tend to have trouble coming to a common agreement. We will talk moreon that in the episode about shared mental model.To look at how we take in huge amounts of information, lets turn to magic. No....I’m not saying ourbrains rely on magic, science can help us understand. BUT, taking a look at how magic works canhelp us understand how we process information.[Story Start]A lifelong obsession with magic and illusions enabled the boy from Brooklyn to become one of thebest known magicians of all time, David Blaine. Unlike several other well known magicians, Blainedoesn’t like to use camera angles or other special effects to make ticks seem real only on television.He prefers illusions that take advantage of the way our brains process information to create magic.Although David Blaine has done lots of very large tricks, let’s take a look at one of him more simpletricks he did in front of actress Emma Stone to analyze how we can be so easily “tricked”.###SimplicityThe best coder writes code anyone can understandHow did this ever work?Legacy Code
Episode 3: Flow##Anyone who has been writing code long enough has had the moments when they realize its 2amand time has flown by. These times are often the most productive. This is because of the state offlow! (Ted Talk from the father of Flow).FlowOne of the major requirements to get into a state of flow is that a person has the proper skills andknowledge to perform the task. Your brain goes through transient hypofrontality, which basicallymeans your prefrontal cortex decreases activity allowing the rest of your brain to communicatemore efficiently. Athletes are a great example because they practice for thousands of hours in orderto allow the mind to make decisions without cognitive thinking. If you watch interviews of athletesafter they perform at their peak, they often say they were in the zone or they were focused to a stateof tunnel vision. This is because their mind actually stopped using their prefrontal cortex to processall of the information coming at them (Don’t see code with your eyes!).The best part, flow triggers chemicals in your brain that have been proven to provide lasting feelingsof happiness!Yeah it sounds crazy, but I’m serious. If you are thinking while writing code, you are doing it wrong.Before you move along, let me explain.Writing code involves a series of complex decisions that you make that often have a high impact onnot only the system itself, but future maintainability. That’s a lot of pressure. What if you make thewrong decision?Write Production Code with IntentI suggest you separate decision making and writing code.Writing code should be about execution. Many highly train people get to a point where they almosttotally subconsciously execute what they have practiced. Similarly with coding, you are in a constantstate of identifying decision points, validating scenarios, and executing previously determined paths.When you get to a decision point where the scenario does not match your validation, you shouldstop.....and think.Let’s step through an simplified example. You have a design pattern that involves a code repositorythat returns a list of objects from a database. Your mental validation requires that the scenarioincludes a complete list of all objects. There are many scenarios where this works and you write the
Episode 3: Flow13code. Now you encounter a large list of objects and realize you need to support pagination. It’s timeto stop and think about how you will support pagination in your repository. Once you have made adecision, add it to your mental playbook and get back to coding!A vital part of the best teams is a shared mental playbook. As you share situations that don’tfit into your team’s mental playbook, you help the entire team.If you feel yourself getting stuck and not making the progress you expect, its probably because youare trying to think and code at the same time. So stop and think, and then get back to coding.Block Out NoiseGet Back To Flow faster
Episode 4: Dev PlaybookThe first step in gathering the proper skills and knowledge to perform a task is to consciouslythink about all of the decisions that you need to make in order to do that task. Often there arethings that you may being doing without recognizing the decisions you are making. This about howstressful first learning how to drive a car can be. After learning about all of the potential decisionsand practicing, most people simply make hundreds of decisions while driving to the grocery storewithout thinking about it.Define TasksGrab a notebook (sometimes a physical pencil and paper slow you down enough to help yourecognize more details) and start writing down everything you are doing in order to perform atask. Once you feel good you have documented it all, go through it and think through each stepand see if there is a better way. As the saying goes, “practice doesn’t make perfect, perfect practicemakes perfect”.Find a person that has played a high level of any sport. Ask them to teach you how to run a commonplay or move their team performed frequently. I’m sure they could talk for over half an hour withouteven fully explaining every position, body posture, and timing required.Now ask how they would tell a teammate to perform the exact same tasks. In under 30 seconds,they could probably coach a teammate to any new play. This is because they haverefactored theirmoves down to simple commands.Each complex play becomes a combination of a set of knownmoves.Coaches know that they need to communicate complex concepts in extremely short time frames un-der adverse conditions. This comes from team members communicating with each other thousandsof times until they have refactored commands down to single words or even hand gestures. Yourdevelopment team should be no different.If a web application needs a new form to input some new data, you may need to spend a long timecommunicating the first time. Take a second and think through what you would tell someone theyneeded to do in order to accomplish a task. Some of those steps probably are common enough thatthey can be communicated with far fewer words if your team understands key concepts.For example, if a team typically uses auto mapper to map from a view model to a business object.The mapping profile is stored by convention in a specific folder. When a view model isn’t valid, itreturns errors in a consistent way. Once your team is familiar with these common steps, you cansimply say ”map the view model”.
Episode 4: Dev Playbook15What to include?Simple PlaysJust like in code, when you find yourself repeating yourself, refactor your communication into simplecommands.Where refactoring a team’s communication really pays off is when you aren’t doing things exactlythe way you normally would. Let’s say that have multiple html forms posting to the same serverside action. Since your team already knows what ”map the view model” means, you can tell themto ”use a switch statement based on view model type to map the view models”. Using the simplecommand for the large portion your team member already understands allows the conversation tofocus on the part that is new or different.Refactoring your communication will improve both the speed and the accuracy in which your teamdiscusses development.Refactor into a playbookStealing another trick from sports teams, think about taking commonplaysyour team uses such asmapping a view model, and turn it into a playbook. This can be given to new team members andalso used by existing team members as a mental refresher.Get your teams playbook started and watch your teams communication improve.Highlight Variances
Episode 5: Friends don’t let friendsthink aloneOrganize info like a hotel. Flow is like key master from matrixRock climbing with team hand holdsIn order to change someones mind, you need to provide them with information they don’t alreadyknow. Simple and accessible information drives shared mental modelsNow that you have your own details of a task documented, time to bring in some friends. Walkthrough the steps you often take and have a discussion about what they may do differently or howthey may have a different perspective. This builds a team shared mental model for both terms andapproaches.Normal conversation is often complicated to give lots of details, so part of this exercise should beto help build common terms that the team can use to represent complex/detailed concepts. As thetasks become more well known by the team, they can start to be grouped into common sets of taskssuch as Create a CRUD API. This allows the team to align on an understand set of tasks and discussany details that may deviate from the standard tasks.
